BITCOIN EMERGENCY MODE 

Obviously I dont want people to panic, but I do want to open up a discussion amongst the Bitcoin and Bitcoin Core contributors about the ethical implications and honesty.
How can there be 347 issues on something that is supposed to be a standard? Using common sense, it just seems like a big red flag. Its like Bitcoin is sick and still going to work, when it should have stayed home. Now everyone is infected
Another issue is the alert system on RSS. Take a look yourself. It says "It can disappear from your wallet at any point up until the situation is solved." You guys said you would update that page but its the same on the official site. 
Proof https://twitter.com/kakaart12/status/1652025816589697025?s=20

Anyway, I know some of you agree with me, and are just keeping silent because you dont want chaos. Understandable. Instead we should have some class and make something like this:

https://sourceforge.net/projects/btc/

I built this Bitcoin network to act as a global support system *

Here, people can request financial aid from a peer. Its a Bitcoin-to-Peer model. And since XBT (Bitcoin) is a store of value; barter and trade is also an acceptable way to transact

This current version we have of Bitcoin is just another mechanism to transfer more wealth from the common and middle upper class into the hands of the rich. The mining and cryptographic stuff is just confusion and it was not what Satoshi Nakamoto intended.

That is not what Bitcoin was made for.

For sure the price has been steadily going up and there's that chart everyone likes showing. They are the same ones that get pressured to sell at a loss. Every form of media is used against you to sell. High level banking business dealings. Will reveal tremendous market manipulation.

Now it is time for them to pay.

With state of the art technology in the field of law and forensics. The verdict that arises from it, will be the undeniable truth.

It will be *easy work * pointing out who is running a ponzi scheme and pump and dumps; and for the politicians it will reveal if our taxes are being put to good use.

Instead of pressing charges or filing class action law suits against these banker types

We can introduce them a way to right their wrongs and they can pass this message to their friends to come in and essentially get baptized. That is by participating in XBT (Bitcoin) and transferring a fair amount to fulfill request of a peer. It could be for bills, grocery, auto repairs, Christmas presents, consulting, a car....

There is enough money to go around for everyone. If there is patterns such as requests to pay for essential living i,e electric, gas, water, student loans, grocery)

We will be the ones to prompt government into providing these essentials

This will transpire into a world with less psychic pressure on the populous and would allow an individual to relax and not have to work 2nd jobs, take weekend shifts all just to survive.

Golden age of humanity coming soon
